 ---
 layout: post		
 title: "Explaning CTD"		
 author: "Anika Mittu"			
 author-pic: anika.jpg	
 tags: [Conductivity, Temperature, Turbidity, Water Depth]		
 img: Trees for CTD Post.jpg
 ---
 
Part of our mission here at Ecosherwood remains making science understandable to the community by applying environmental concepts to local ecology. So, we though that it may be helpful to briefly provide a simple explanation of why we study conductivity, temperature, turbidity, and water depth in our study site, to help readers better understand the graphs that we post in the "Our Project" page. Here you go!

What is conductivity?
Conductivity is defined as the degree to which electricity can pass through water, and conductivity increases when the level of dissolved salts and inorganic materials rises in the stream. Dissolved salts have been separated into their component ions, called electrolytes, and move throughout the water. These free-moving ions create an electrical charge in the stream.

Why is conductivity important to our study?
Since conductivity increases when the dissolved salt levels in water increase, conductivity may increase when road salts run off into streams. Increased ions in the stream may also arise due to agriculural or urban runoff, both of which are relevant to our study site due to suburban setting. To monitor this runoff and pollutant rise will be essential in monitoring biodiversity in our stream, as many species cannot tolerate abnormal salinity levels.  

What is temperature?
The amount of heat present in a substance. 

Why is temperature important to our study? 
Increased temperature may arise from thermal pollution created by human activities. Since many organisms cannot tolerate temperatures above or below their optimal range, thermal pollution can easily decrease biodiversity. When these temperatures exist, these organisms become stressed and the risk of fatality increases dramatically. 

What is turbidity? 
The number of particulates in the water, and the resulting haziness or cloudiness of the stream. 

Why is turbidity important to our study?
Turbidity harms biodiversity, as water entering the bodies of animals with gills, such as fish, may create disease- similar to how breathing in polluted air creates a host of illnesses in humans. Turbidity also decreases the light penetration of a stream, meaning that photosynthesizing organisms cannot recieve the sunlight they need to produce oxygen. Since aquatic life depends on oxygen, a lack of this gas may create stress for the animals and increase their fatality rates. 

What is water depth?
This is a straightforward one: the depth of the stream. 

Why is water depth important to our study?
A rapid increase in water depth may denote flooding, while a decrease may indicate an extended period without sufficient rain. A sudden increase may also originate from dumping, and would likely cause our group to further investigate any potential addition of pollutants. As discussed in the conductivity section, many species cannot handle dissolved ions above the average for that area of the stream. Since dumped pollutants often contain these dissolved ions, our group watches for sudden depth changes to report data on how pollution could potentially harm biodiversity.  
